you
what is at the center of the universe
it's an essential question that humans
have been wondering about for centuries
but the journey toward an answer has
been a strange one if he wanted to know
the answer to this question in third
century BCE Greece you might look up at
the night sky and trust what you see
that's what Aristotle the guide to ask
back then did he thought that since
we're on earth looking up it must be the
center right for him the sphere of the
world was made up of four elements earth
water air and fire these elements
shifted around a nested set of solid
crystalline spheres each of the
wandering stars the planets had their
own crystal sphere the rest of the
universe and all of its stars were on
the last crystal sphere if you watch the
sky change over time you could see that
this idea worked fine at explaining the
motion you saw for centuries this was
central to how Europe in the Islamic
world saw the universe but in 1543 a guy
named Copernicus proposed a different
model he believed that the Sun was at
the center of the universe this
radically new idea was hard for a lot of
people to accept after all Aristotle's
ideas made sense with what they could
see and they were pretty flattering to
humans but a series of subsequent
discoveries made the Sun centric model
hard to ignore
first Johannes Kepler pointed out that
orbits aren't perfect circles or spheres
then Galileo's telescope caught
Jupiter's moons orbiting around Jupiter
totally ignoring earth and then Newton
proposed the theory of universal
gravitation demonstrating that all
objects are pulling on each other
eventually we had to let go of the idea
that we were at the center of the
universe shortly after Copernicus in the
1580s an Italian friar Giordano Bruno
suggested the stars were Suns that
likely had their own planets and that
the universe was Infinite this idea
didn't go over well Bruno was burned at
the stake for his radical suggestion
centuries later the philosopher Rene
Descartes proposed that the universe was
a series of whirlpools which he called
vortices
and that each star was at the center of
a whirlpool in time we realize there
were far more stars than Aristotle ever
dreamed as astronomers like William
Herschel got more and more advanced
telescopes it became clear that our Sun
is actually one of many stars inside the
Milky Way and those smudges we see in
the night sky there are other galaxies
just as vast as our Milky Way home maybe
we're farther from the center than we
ever realized in the 1920s astronomers
studying the nebulae wanted to figure
out how they were moving based on the
Doppler effect they expected to see blue
shift for objects moving toward us and
red shift for ones moving away but all
they saw was a red shift everything was
moving away from us fast this
observation is one of the pieces of
evidence for what we now call the Big
Bang Theory according to this theory all
matter in the universe was once a
singular infinitely dense particle in a
sense our piece of the universe was once
at the center but this theory eliminates
the whole idea of a center since there
can't be a center to an infinite
universe the Big Bang wasn't just an
explosion in space it was an explosion
of space what each new discovery proves
is that while our observations are
limited our ability to speculate and
dream of what's out there isn't what we
think we know today can change tomorrow
as with many of the thinkers we just met
sometimes our wildest guesses lead to
wonderful and humbling answers and
propel us toward even more perplexing
questions
you